Bluetooth: shell: Add examples for the Bluetooth Shell (#54124)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/connectivity/bluetooth/bluetooth-shell.rst

.. _bluetooth_shell:

Bluetooth Shell
###############

> Bluetooth Shell Setup and Usage

Reviewer: A small sentence explaining what "Bluetooth Shell" is and what it can be used for.

*******************************

First you need to build and flash your board with the Bluetooth shell. For more details on that,
look at the :ref:`getting_started`. The Bluetooth shell itself is located in
:zephyr_file:`tests/bluetooth/shell/`.

> When it's done, connect to the CLI using your favorite application. You should be welcomed by the

Reviewer: using your favorite serial terminal application

following prompt:

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$

For more details on the common usage of the shell, see :ref:`shell_api`.

> The first thing you need to do is enable Bluetooth. To do, use :code:`bt init`. Messages should

Author: I am not sure, usually "call" is for functions.

> The first thing you need to do is enable Bluetooth. To do, use :code:`bt init`. Messages should

Reviewer 2: The "command is good for all the uses where I suggested it.

> confirm you the initialization with a bunch of logging message, if enabled.

Reviewer: `Messages should be printed confirming Bluetooth has been initialized.`

Could you also add a small snippet of what a `bt init` call ouptuts?

Identities
**********

The shell allows the creation of multiple identities, the maximum being set by the Kconfig symbol
:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_ID_MAX`. To create a new identity, use :code:`bt id-create`. You can then
use it by selecting it with its ID :code:`bt id-select <id>`. Finally, you can list all the

> identities available with :code:`id-show`.

Reviewer: `available identities.`

Could you add another sentence briefly describing the concept of identity? Since we don't really have it anywhere; we will move it when we add stack documentation for it.

Something like:
`Identities are a Zephyr host concept, allowing a single physical device to behave like multiple logical Bluetooth devices.`

Scan for devices
****************

Start scanning by using :code:`bt scan on`. Depending on the environment you're in, you may see a

> lot of new line on the shell. To stop the scan, run :code:`bt scan off`, the scrolling should stop.

Reviewer: you may see a lot of lines printed on the shell.

> Here is an example of what you could expect:

Reviewer: can

        [DEVICE]: 20:C2:EE:59:85:5B (random), AD evt type 3, RSSI -66  C:0 S:0 D:0 SR:0 E:0 Prim: LE 1M, Secn: No packets, Interval: 0x0000 (0 us), SID: 0xff
        [DEVICE]: 25:3F:7A:EE:0F:55 (random), AD evt type 3, RSSI -83  C:0 S:0 D:0 SR:0 E:0 Prim: LE 1M, Secn: No packets, Interval: 0x0000 (0 us), SID: 0xff
        uart:~$ bt scan off
        Scan successfully stopped

As you can see, this can lead to a high number of results. To reduce that number and easily find a
specific device, you can enable scan filters. There are four types of filtering, by name, by RSSI,
by address and by periodic advertising interval. To apply a filter, you need to use
:code:`bt scan-set-filter` followed by the type of filtering.

For example, if you want to look only for device with the name *test shell*:

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ bt scan-filter-set name "test shell"

Or if you want to look for devices on really close range:

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ bt scan-filter-set rssi -40
        RSSI cutoff set at -40 dB

> Finally, if you want to remove all filters:

Author: You're right, I should add something like that just before the first filter example: "You can add multiple filters by using the commands again."

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ bt scan-filter-clear all

Connecting to a device
**********************

To connect to a device, if you know its address and type of address simply use :code:`bt connect`
with the address and the type as arguments.

Here is an example:

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ bt connect 52:84:F6:BD:CE:48 random
        Connection pending
        Connected: 52:84:F6:BD:CE:48 (random)
        Remote LMP version 5.3 (0x0c) subversion 0xffff manufacturer 0x05f1
        LE Features: 0x000000000001412f
        LE PHY updated: TX PHY LE 2M, RX PHY LE 2M
        LE conn  param req: int (0x0018, 0x0028) lat 0 to 42
        LE conn param updated: int 0x0028 lat 0 to 42

You can list the active connections of the shell using :code:`bt connections`. The shell maximum
number of connections is defined by :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_MAX_CONN`. You can disconnect from a
connection with :code:`bt disconnect <address: XX:XX:XX:XX:XX:XX> <type: (public|random)>`.

> On a side note, if you were scanning just before, you can connect to the last scanned device by

Reviewer: There is a sphinx tag for notes (`.. note::`), see the getting started .rst for usage.
Suggest removing `on a side note,` and using that tag instead.

resolvable private address with the name of the device. You can choose to use the identity address
instead by running :code:`bt advertise on identity`. To stop advertising use
:code:`bt advertise off`.

To enable more advanced features of advertising, you should create an advertiser using
:code:`bt adv-create`. Parameters for the advertiser can be passed at the creation of it or by using
:code:`bt adv-param`. To begin advertising with this newly created advertiser, use
:code:`bt adv-start` and :code:`bt adv-stop` to stop advertising.

When using the custom made advertisers, you can choose if it will be connectable or scannable
leading to four options: :code:`conn-scan`, :code:`conn-nscan`, :code:`nconn-scan` and
:code:`nconn-nscan`. Those parameters are mandatory when creating an advertiser or updating his
parameters.

For example, if you want to create a connectable and scannable advertiser and start it:

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ bt adv-create conn-scan
        Created adv id: 0, adv: 0x200022f0
        uart:~$ bt adv-start
        Advertiser[0] 0x200022f0 set started

> You may notice that with this custom advertiser do not advertise the device name, you need to enable

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You may notice that this custom advertiser does not advertise the device name; you need to enable
```

> it. If we take back from the previous example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it. Continuing from the previous example:
```

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ bt adv-stop
        Advertiser set stopped
        uart:~$ bt adv-param conn-scan name
        uart:~$ bt adv-start
        Advertiser[0] 0x200022f0 set started

You should now see the name of the device in the advertising data. You can also set the advertising

> data manually by using :code:`bt adv-data`. The following example show how to set the advertiser

Reviewer: shows

> data manually by using :code:`bt adv-data`. The following example show how to set the advertiser

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
data manually by using the :code:`bt adv-data` command. The following example shows how to set the advertiser
```

name with it:

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ bt adv-create conn-scan
        Created adv id: 0, adv: 0x20002348
        uart:~$ bt adv-data 1009426C7565746F6F74682D5368656C6C
        uart:~$ bt adv-start
        Advertiser[0] 0x20002348 set started

The data must be formatted according to the Bluetooth Core Specification (see version 5.3, vol. 3,

> part C, 11). In this example, the first octet is the size of the data, the second one is type of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
part C, 11). In this example, the first octet is the size of the data, the second one is the type of
```

> data, 0x09 being the Complete Local Name and the remaining data are the name in ASCII. So, on the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
data, ``0x09`` is the Complete Local Name and the remaining data are the name in ASCII. So, on the
```

other device you should see the name *Bluetooth-Shell*.

Directed Advertising
====================

It is possible to use directed advertising on the shell if you want to reconnect to a device. The

> following example, demonstrate how to create a directed advertiser. The address is specified right

Reviewer: demonstrates

> following example, demonstrate how to create a directed advertiser. The address is specified right

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
following example demonstrates how to create a directed advertiser. The address is specified right
```

after the parameter :code:`directed`. The :code:`low` parameter indicates that we want to use the

> low duty cycle mode. :code:`dir-rpa` is required if the remote device has a security level enabling

Reviewer: I'm not sure about that, isn't it just if the other device uses privacy?

> low duty cycle mode. :code:`dir-rpa` is required if the remote device has a security level enabling

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
low duty cycle mode. :code:`dir-rpa` is required if the remote device has a security level that enables
```

authentication.

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ bt adv-create conn-scan directed D7:54:03:CE:F3:B4 random low dir-rpa
        Created adv id: 0, adv: 0x20002348

After that, you can start the advertiser and then the target device will be able to reconnect.

Extended Advertising
====================

> Let's now have a look at some extended advertising features, to enable extended advertising, use the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's now have a look at some extended advertising features. To enable extended advertising, use the
```

`ext-adv` parameter.

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ bt adv-create conn-nscan ext-adv name-ad
        Created adv id: 0, adv: 0x200022f0
        uart:~$ bt adv-start
        Advertiser[0] 0x200022f0 set started

This will create an advertiser, connectable and non scannable.

Filter Accept List
******************

> It's possible to create a list of allowed addresses. That list can be used to
> connect to those addresses automatically, here is how to do it:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's possible to create a list of allowed addresses that can be used to
connect to those addresses automatically. Here is how to do it:
```

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ bt fal-add 47:38:76:EA:29:36 random
        uart:~$ bt fal-add 66:C8:80:2A:05:73 random
        uart:~$ bt fal-connect on

> It will then connect to the first available device. In the example, if both devices are advertising

Reviewer 2: Is "It" here "device" or "the shell"? Or something else entirely.

Author: The device, I will update that.

at the same time, we will connect to the first address added to the list.

The Filter Accept List can also be used for scanning or advertising by using the option :code:`fal`.
For example, if we want to scan for a bunch of selected addresses, we can set up a Filter Accept

> List, like that:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
List:
```

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ bt fal-add 65:4B:9E:83:AF:73 random
        uart:~$ bt fal-add 73:72:82:B4:8F:B9 random
        uart:~$ bt fal-add 5D:85:50:1C:72:64 random
        uart:~$ bt scan on fal

You should see only those three addresses reported by the scanner.

Enabling security
*****************

> When connected to a device, you can enable multiple level of security, here is the list for

Reviewer: levels

Bluetooth LE:

* **1** No encryption and no authentication;
* **2** Encryption and no authentication;
* **3** Encryption and authentication;
* **4** Bluetooth LE Secure Connection.

> To enable security, do :code:`bt security <level>`. For levels requiring authentication (level 3 and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable security, use the :code:`bt security <level>` command. For levels requiring authentication (level 3 and
```

> above), you must first set the authentication method, to do it, you can use :code:`bt auth all`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
above), you must first set the authentication method. Tto do it, you can use :code:`bt auth all`.
```

After that, when you will set the security level, you will be asked to confirm the passkey on both
devices. On the shell side, do it with the command :code:`bt auth-passkey-confirm`.

Pairing
=======

Enabling authentication requires the devices to be bondable. By default the shell is bondable. You

> can make the shell not bondable using :code:`bt bondable off`. You can list all the device you are

Reviewer: devices

> paired with :code:`bt bonds`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
paired with the command :code:`bt bonds`.
```

> The shell has a maximum of paired devices defined by :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_MAX_PAIRED`. You can

Reviewer: The maximum number of paired devices is set using ...

remove a paired device using :code:`bt clear <address: XX:XX:XX:XX:XX:XX> <type: (public|random)>`

> or simply remove all paired device with :code:`bt clear all`.

Reviewer: devices

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
or remove all paired device with the command :code:`bt clear all`.
```

GATT
****

> On the following examples we will assume that you have two devices already connected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following examples assume that you have two devices already connected.
```

> To perform services discovery on the client side, use :code:`gatt discover`. This should show you

Reviewer: service discovery
This should print all the services that are available on the GATT server.

> To perform services discovery on the client side, use :code:`gatt discover`. This should show you

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To perform service discovery on the client side, use the :code:`gatt discover` command. This should show you
```

the all the services on the server.

> On the server side, you can register pre-defined test service using :code:`gatt register`. When

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On the server side, you can register a pre-defined test service using the :code:`gatt register` command. When
```

done, you should see the newly added services on the client side when running the discovery command.

> You can now subscribe to those new services on the client side, here is an example on how to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can now subscribe to those new services on the client side. Here is an example on how to
```

subscribe to the test service:

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ gatt subscribe 26 25
        Subscribed

> The server can now notify the client with :code:`gatt notify`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The server can now notify the client with the command :code:`gatt notify`.
```

> Another option available though the GATT command is initiating the MTU exchange, to do it, use

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another option available though the GATT command is initiating the MTU exchange. To do it, use
```

> :code:`gatt exchange-mtu`. To update the shell maximum MTU you need to update Kconfig symbols in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the :code:`gatt exchange-mtu` command. To update the shell maximum MTU, you need to update Kconfig symbols in the
```

configuration file of the shell. For more details on how to do it, look at the sample
:ref:`bluetooth_mtu_update_sample`.

L2CAP
*****

> It is possible to use L2CAP commands into the shell. The following example will show you how to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is possible to use L2CAP commands in the shell. The following example shows you how to
```

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ l2cap connect 29
        Chan sec: 1
        L2CAP connection pending
        Channel 0x20000210 connected
        Channel 0x20000210 status 1
        uart:~$ l2cap send 3 14
        Rem 2
        Rem 1
        Rem 0
        Outgoing data channel 0x20000210 transmitted
        Outgoing data channel 0x20000210 transmitted
        Outgoing data channel 0x20000210 transmitted

On device A, you should have received the data:

.. code-block:: console

        Incoming conn 0x20002398
        Channel 0x20000210 status 1
        Channel 0x20000210 connected
        Channel 0x20000210 requires buffer
        Incoming data channel 0x20000210 len 14
        00000000: ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff       |........ ......  |
        Channel 0x20000210 requires buffer
        Incoming data channel 0x20000210 len 14
        00000000: ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff       |........ ......  |
        Channel 0x20000210 requires buffer
        Incoming data channel 0x20000210 len 14
        00000000: ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff       |........ ......  |

Logging
*******

> You can configure the level of logging of each module directly in the shell. To do that use the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can configure the logging level per module at runtime. This depends on the maximum logging level that is compiled in. To configure, use the
```

:code:`log` command. Here are some examples:

* Listing the available modules and their current logging level

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ log status

* Disabling logging for *bt_hci_core*

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ log disable bt_hci_core

> * Enable errors logging messages for *bt_att* and *bt_smp*

Reviewer: Enable error logs for *bt_att* ..

.. _bluetooth_shell:

Bluetooth Shell
###############

The Bluetooth Shell is an application based on the :ref:`shell_api` module. It offer a collection of
commands made to easily interact with the Bluetooth stack.

Bluetooth Shell Setup and Usage
*******************************

First you need to build and flash your board with the Bluetooth shell. For how to do that, see the
:ref:`getting_started`. The Bluetooth shell itself is located in
:zephyr_file:`tests/bluetooth/shell/`.

When it's done, connect to the CLI using your favorite serial terminal application. You should see
the following prompt:

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$

For more details on general usage of the shell, see :ref:`shell_api`.

The first step is enabling Bluetooth. To do so, use the :code:`bt init` command. Messages should be
printed confirming Bluetooth has been initialized. The following message is printed to confirm

> Bluetooth has been initialized.

Reviewer 2: There's now two sentences saying the same thing.

Author: Oh yeah oops, sorry 😅

* **3** Encryption and authentication;
* **4** Bluetooth LE Secure Connection.

To enable security, use the :code:`bt security <level>` command. For levels requiring authentication
(level 3 and above), you must first set the authentication method. To do it, you can use the
:code:`bt auth all` command. After that, when you will set the security level, you will be asked to
confirm the passkey on both devices. On the shell side, do it with the command
:code:`bt auth-passkey-confirm`.

Pairing
=======

Enabling authentication requires the devices to be bondable. By default the shell is bondable. You
can make the shell not bondable using :code:`bt bondable off`. You can list all the devices you are
paired with the command :code:`bt bonds`.

The maximum number of paired devices is set using :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_MAX_PAIRED`. You can
remove a paired device using :code:`bt clear <address: XX:XX:XX:XX:XX:XX> <type: (public|random)>`
or remove all paired devices with the command :code:`bt clear all`.

GATT
****

The following examples assume that you have two devices already connected.

To perform service discovery on the client side, use the :code:`gatt discover` command. This should

> print all the the services that are available on the GATT server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
print all the services that are available on the GATT server.
```

> On the server side, you can register a pre-defined test services using the :code:`gatt register`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On the server side, you can register pre-defined test services using the :code:`gatt register`
```

        [DEVICE]: 25:3F:7A:EE:0F:55 (random), AD evt type 3, RSSI -83  C:0 S:0 D:0 SR:0 E:0 Prim: LE 1M, Secn: No packets, Interval: 0x0000 (0 us), SID: 0xff
        uart:~$ bt scan off
        Scan successfully stopped

As you can see, this can lead to a high number of results. To reduce that number and easily find a
specific device, you can enable scan filters. There are four types of filters: by name, by RSSI, by
address and by periodic advertising interval. To apply a filter, use the :code:`bt scan-set-filter`
command followed by the type of filters. You can add multiple filters by using the commands again.

For example, if you want to look only for devices with the name *test shell*:

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ bt scan-filter-set name "test shell"

Or if you want to look for devices at a very close range:

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ bt scan-filter-set rssi -40
        RSSI cutoff set at -40 dB

Finally, if you want to remove all filters:

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ bt scan-filter-clear all

> The command :code:`bt scan on` create an *active* scanner, meaning that the scanner will ask the
> advertisers for more information by sending a *scan request* packet. It is possible to use a
> *passive scanner* by using the :code:`bt scan passive` command, the scanner will so not ask the
> advertiser for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use the command :code:`bt scan on` to create an *active* scanner, meaning that the scanner will ask the
advertisers for more information by sending a *scan request* packet. Alternatively, you can create a
*passive scanner* by using the :code:`bt scan passive` command, so the scanner will not ask the
advertiser for more information.
```

identity address instead by running the :code:`bt advertise on identity` command. To stop
advertising use the :code:`bt advertise off` command.

To enable more advanced features of advertising, you should create an advertiser using the
:code:`bt adv-create` command. Parameters for the advertiser can be passed either at the creation of
it or by using the :code:`bt adv-param` command. To begin advertising with this newly created
advertiser, use the :code:`bt adv-start` command, and then the :code:`bt adv-stop` command to stop
advertising.

When using the custom advertisers, you can choose if it will be connectable or scannable. This leads
to four options: :code:`conn-scan`, :code:`conn-nscan`, :code:`nconn-scan` and :code:`nconn-nscan`.
Those parameters are mandatory when creating an advertiser or updating its parameters.

For example, if you want to create a connectable and scannable advertiser and start it:

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ bt adv-create conn-scan
        Created adv id: 0, adv: 0x200022f0
        uart:~$ bt adv-start
        Advertiser[0] 0x200022f0 set started

> You may notice that with this custom advertiser does not advertise the device name; you need to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You may notice that with this, the custom advertiser does not advertise the device name; you need to
```

data manually by using the :code:`bt adv-data` command. The following example shows how to set the
advertiser name with it:

.. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ bt adv-create conn-scan
        Created adv id: 0, adv: 0x20002348
        uart:~$ bt adv-data 1009426C7565746F6F74682D5368656C6C
        uart:~$ bt adv-start
        Advertiser[0] 0x20002348 set started

The data must be formatted according to the Bluetooth Core Specification (see version 5.3, vol. 3,
part C, 11). In this example, the first octet is the size of the data (the data and one octet for
the data type), the second one is the type of data, ``0x09`` is the Complete Local Name and the
remaining data are the name in ASCII. So, on the other device you should see the name
*Bluetooth-Shell*.

When advertising, if others devices use an *active* scanner, you may receive *scan request* packets.
To visualize those packets, you can add :code:`scan-reports` to the parameters of your advertiser.

Directed Advertising
====================

It is possible to use directed advertising on the shell if you want to reconnect to a device. The

> following example, demonstrates how to create a directed advertiser. The address is specified right

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
following example demonstrates how to create a directed advertiser with the address specified right
```

after the parameter :code:`directed`. The :code:`low` parameter indicates that we want to use the

> low duty cycle mode. :code:`dir-rpa` is required if the remote device is privacy-enabled and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
low duty cycle mode, and the :code:`dir-rpa` parameter is required if the remote device is privacy-enabled and
```

        uart:~$ bt fal-add 65:4B:9E:83:AF:73 random
        uart:~$ bt fal-add 73:72:82:B4:8F:B9 random
        uart:~$ bt fal-add 5D:85:50:1C:72:64 random
        uart:~$ bt scan on fal

You should see only those three addresses reported by the scanner.

Enabling security
*****************

When connected to a device, you can enable multiple levels of security, here is the list for
Bluetooth LE:

* **1** No encryption and no authentication;
* **2** Encryption and no authentication;
* **3** Encryption and authentication;
* **4** Bluetooth LE Secure Connection.

To enable security, use the :code:`bt security <level>` command. For levels requiring authentication
(level 3 and above), you must first set the authentication method. To do it, you can use the
:code:`bt auth all` command. After that, when you will set the security level, you will be asked to
confirm the passkey on both devices. On the shell side, do it with the command
:code:`bt auth-passkey-confirm`.

Pairing
=======

Enabling authentication requires the devices to be bondable. By default the shell is bondable. You
can make the shell not bondable using :code:`bt bondable off`. You can list all the devices you are

> paired with the command :code:`bt bonds`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
paired with using the command :code:`bt bonds`.
```
